This is a guide to using [YubiKey](https://www.yubico.com/products/yubikey-hardware/) as a [SmartCard](https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/38924/how-does-storing-gpg-ssh-private-keys-on-smart-cards-compare-to-plain-usb-drives) for storing GPG encryption, signing and authentication keys, which can also be used for SSH. Many of the principles in this document are applicable to other smart card devices.

Keys stored on YubiKey are [non-exportable](https://support.yubico.com/support/solutions/articles/15000010242-can-i-duplicate-or-back-up-a-yubikey-) (as opposed to file-based keys that are stored on disk) and are convenient for everyday use. Instead of having to remember and enter passphrases to unlock SSH/GPG keys, YubiKey needs only a physical touch after being unlocked with a PIN. All signing and encryption operations happen on the card, rather than in OS memory.

## macOS

Download and install MacPorts and the following packages:

```console
$ port install gnupg2 pinentry_mac
$ ln -sh /opt/local/bin/gpg2 /usr/local/bin/gpg
```


## YubiKey

To feed the system's PRNG with entropy generated by the YubiKey itself, issue:
```console
$ echo "SCD RANDOM 512" | gpg-connect-agent | sudo tee /dev/random | hexdump -C
```
This will seed the (Linux) kernel's PRNG with additional 512 bytes retrieved from the YubiKey.

# Initializing device

# Creating keys

Otherwise, to preserve the working environment, set the GnuPG directory to your home folder:

```console
$ export GNUPGHOME=~/.gnupg
```

## Harden configuration

Create a hardened configuration in the temporary working directory with the following options:

```console
$ echo "# added from https://raw.githubusercontent.com/drduh/config/master/gpg.conf" >> $GNUPGHOME/gpg.conf
$ curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/drduh/config/master/gpg.conf >> $GNUPGHOME/gpg.conf
```

Disable networking for the remainder of the setup.

# Master key

The only keys to generate is a master key on the YubiKey itself to ensure no other copies exist.


# Sign with existing key

(Optional) If you already have a PGP key, you may want to sign the new key with the old one to prove that the new key is controlled by you.

Export your existing key to move it to the working keyring:

```console
$ gpg --export-secret-keys --armor --output /tmp/new.sec
```

Then sign the new key:

```console
$ gpg  --default-key $OLDKEY --sign-key $KEYID
```

# Verify

List the generated secret keys and verify the output:

```console
$ gpg -K
/tmp.FLZC0xcM/pubring.kbx
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
sec   rsa4096/0xFF3E7D88647EBCDB 2017-10-09 [C]
      Key fingerprint = 011C E16B D45B 27A5 5BA8  776D FF3E 7D88 647E BCDB
uid                            Dr Duh <doc@duh.to>
ssb   rsa4096/0xBECFA3C1AE191D15 2017-10-09 [S] [expires: 2018-10-09]
ssb   rsa4096/0x5912A795E90DD2CF 2017-10-09 [E] [expires: 2018-10-09]
ssb   rsa4096/0x3F29127E79649A3D 2017-10-09 [A] [expires: 2018-10-09]
```

Add any additional identities or email addresses you wish to associate using the `adduid` command.

**Tip** Verify with a OpenPGP [key best practice checker](https://riseup.net/en/security/message-security/openpgp/best-practices#openpgp-key-checks):

```console
$ gpg --export $KEYID | hokey lint
```

The output will display any problems with your key in red text. If everything is green, your key passes each of the tests. If it is red, your key has failed one of the tests.

> hokey may warn (orange text) about cross certification for the authentication key. GPG's [Signing Subkey Cross-Certification](https://gnupg.org/faq/subkey-cross-certify.html) documentation has more detail on cross certification, and gpg v2.2.1 notes "subkey <keyid> does not sign and so does not need to be cross-certified". hokey may also indicate a problem (red text) with `Key expiration times: []` on the primary key (see [Note #3](#notes) about not setting an expiry for the primary key).

# Revocation certificate

Although the master key will be securely stored on the key, it is best practice to never rule out the possibility of losing it or having the hardware fail. Without the master key, it will be impossible generate a revocation certificate later.

Even worse, we cannot advertise this fact in any way to those that are using our keys. It is reasonable to assume this *will* occur at some point and the only remaining way to deprecate orphaned keys is a revocation certificate.

To create the revocation certificate:

``` console
$ gpg --output $GNUPGHOME/revoke.asc --gen-revoke $KEYID
```

The `revoke.asc` certificate file should be stored (or printed) in a (secondary) place that allows retrieval in case the main backup fails.

# Export public keys

**Important** Without the *public* key, you will not be able to use GPG to encrypt, decrypt, nor sign messages. However, you will still be able to use YubiKey for SSH authentication.

Upload the public key to a [public keyserver](https://debian-administration.org/article/451/Submitting_your_GPG_key_to_a_keyserver):

```console
$ gpg --send-key $KEYID

$ gpg --keyserver pgp.mit.edu --send-key $KEYID

$ gpg --keyserver keys.gnupg.net --send-key $KEYID

$ gpg --keyserver hkps://keyserver.ubuntu.com:443 --send-key $KEYID
```

After some time, the public key will propagate to [other](https://pgp.key-server.io/pks/lookup?search=doc%40duh.to&fingerprint=on&op=vindex) [servers](https://pgp.mit.edu/pks/lookup?search=doc%40duh.to&op=index).

# Configure Smartcard

Plug in a YubiKey and use GPG to configure it as a smartcard:

```console
$ gpg --card-edit
Reader ...........: Yubico Yubikey 4 OTP U2F CCID
Application ID ...: D2760001240102010006055532110000
Version ..........: 3.4
Manufacturer .....: Yubico
Serial number ....: 05553211
Name of cardholder: [not set]
Language prefs ...: [not set]
Sex ..............: unspecified
URL of public key : [not set]
Login data .......: [not set]
Signature PIN ....: not forced
Key attributes ...: rsa2048 rsa2048 rsa2048
Max. PIN lengths .: 127 127 127
PIN retry counter : 3 0 3
Signature counter : 0
KDF setting ......: off
Signature key ....: [none]
Encryption key....: [none]
Authentication key: [none]
General key info..: [none]
```

**Note** If the card is locked, see [Reset](#reset).

## Enable KDF
Key Derived Function (KDF) enables YubiKey to store the hash of PIN, preventing the PIN from being passed as plain text.

```console
gpg/card> admin
Admin commands are allowed

gpg/card> kdf-setup
```

## Change PIN

The [GPG interface](https://developers.yubico.com/PGP/) is separate from other modules on a Yubikey such as the [PIV interface](https://developers.yubico.com/PIV/Introduction/YubiKey_and_PIV.html). The GPG interface has its own *PIN*, *Admin PIN*, and *Reset Code* - these should be changed from default values!

Entering the user *PIN* incorrectly three times will cause the PIN to become blocked; it can be unblocked with either the *Admin PIN* or *Reset Code*.

Entering the *Admin PIN* or *Reset Code* incorrectly three times destroys all GPG data on the card. The Yubikey will have to be reconfigured.

Name       | Default Value | Use
-----------|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------
PIN        | `123456`      | decrypt and authenticate (SSH)
Admin PIN  | `12345678`    | reset *PIN*, change *Reset Code*, add keys and owner information
Reset code | _**None**_      | reset *PIN* ([more information](https://forum.yubico.com/viewtopicd01c.html?p=9055#p9055))

Values are valid up to 127 ASCII characters and must be at least 6 (*PIN*) or 8 (*Admin PIN*, *Reset Code*) characters. See the GnuPG documentation on [Managing PINs](https://www.gnupg.org/howtos/card-howto/en/ch03s02.html) for details.

To update the GPG PINs on the Yubikey:

```console
gpg/card> passwd
gpg: OpenPGP card no. D2760001240102010006055532110000 detected

1 - change PIN
2 - unblock PIN
3 - change Admin PIN
4 - set the Reset Code
Q - quit

Your selection? 3
PIN changed.

1 - change PIN
2 - unblock PIN
3 - change Admin PIN
4 - set the Reset Code
Q - quit

Your selection? 1
PIN changed.

1 - change PIN
2 - unblock PIN
3 - change Admin PIN
4 - set the Reset Code
Q - quit

Your selection? q
```

The number of retry attempts can be changed with the following command, documented [here](https://docs.yubico.com/software/yubikey/tools/ykman/OpenPGP_Commands.html#ykman-openpgp-access-set-retries-options-pin-retries-reset-code-retries-admin-pin-retries):

```bash
ykman openpgp access set-retries 5 5 5
```

## Set information

Some fields are optional.

```console
gpg/card> name
Cardholder's surname: Duh
Cardholder's given name: Dr

gpg/card> lang
Language preferences: en

gpg/card> login
Login data (account name): doc@duh.to

gpg/card> list

Application ID ...: D2760001240102010006055532110000
Version ..........: 3.4
Manufacturer .....: unknown
Serial number ....: 05553211
Name of cardholder: Dr Duh
Language prefs ...: en
Sex ..............: unspecified
URL of public key : [not set]
Login data .......: doc@duh.to
Private DO 4 .....: [not set]
Signature PIN ....: not forced
Key attributes ...: rsa2048 rsa2048 rsa2048
Max. PIN lengths .: 127 127 127
PIN retry counter : 3 0 3
Signature counter : 0
KDF setting ......: on
Signature key ....: [none]
Encryption key....: [none]
Authentication key: [none]
General key info..: [none]

gpg/card> quit
```

# Generate keys

# Verify card

Verify the sub-keys have been moved to YubiKey as indicated by `ssb>`:

```console
$ gpg -K
/tmp.FLZC0xcM/pubring.kbx
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
sec   rsa4096/0xFF3E7D88647EBCDB 2017-10-09 [C]
      Key fingerprint = 011C E16B D45B 27A5 5BA8  776D FF3E 7D88 647E BCDB
uid                            Dr Duh <doc@duh.to>
ssb>  rsa4096/0xBECFA3C1AE191D15 2017-10-09 [S] [expires: 2018-10-09]
ssb>  rsa4096/0x5912A795E90DD2CF 2017-10-09 [E] [expires: 2018-10-09]
ssb>  rsa4096/0x3F29127E79649A3D 2017-10-09 [A] [expires: 2018-10-09]
```

## Switching between two or more Yubikeys.
	
When you add a GPG key to a Yubikey using the *keytocard* command, GPG deletes the key from your keyring and adds a *stub* pointing to that exact Yubikey (the stub identifies the GPG KeyID and the Yubikey's serial number).
	
However, when you do this same operation for a second Yubikey, the stub in your keyring is overwritten by the *keytocard* operation and now the stub points to your second Yubikey. Adding more repeats this overwriting operation.

In other words, the stub will point ONLY to the LAST Yubikey written to.
	
When using GPG key operations with the GPG key you placed onto the Yubikeys, GPG will request a specific Yubikey asking that you insert a Yubikey with a given serial number (referenced by the stub). GPG will not recognise another Yubikey with a different serial number without manual intervention.
	
You can force GPG to scan the card and re-create the stubs to point to another Yubikey. 

Having created two (or more Yubikeys) with the same GPG key (as described above) where the stubs are pointing to the second Yubikey:
	
Insert the first Yubikey (which has a different serial numnber) and run the following command:
	
```console
$  gpg-connect-agent "scd serialno" "learn --force" /bye
```
GPG will then scan your first Yubikey for GPG keys and recreate the stubs to point to the GPG keyID and Yubikey Serial number of this first Yubikey.
	
To return to using the second Yubikey just repeat (insert other Yubikey and re-run command).
	
Obviously this command is not easy to remember so it is recommended to either create a script or a shell alias to make this more user friendly.
	
# Cleanup

Ensure you have:

* Saved encryption, signing and authentication sub-keys to YubiKey (`gpg -K` should show `ssb>` for sub-keys).
* Saved the YubiKey user and admin PINs which you changed from defaults.
* Saved the password to the GPG master key in a *permanent* location.
* Saved a revocation certificate offline.
* Saved a copy of the public key somewhere easily accessible later.

# Using keys

Encrypt a message to your own key (useful for storing password credentials and other data):

```console
$ echo "test message string" | gpg --encrypt --armor --recipient $KEYID -o encrypted.txt
```

To encrypt to multiple recipients (or to multiple keys):

```console
$ echo "test message string" | gpg --encrypt --armor --recipient $KEYID_0 --recipient $KEYID_1 --recipient $KEYID_2 -o encrypted.txt
```

Decrypt the message:

```console
$ gpg --decrypt --armor encrypted.txt
gpg: anonymous recipient; trying secret key 0x0000000000000000 ...
gpg: okay, we are the anonymous recipient.
gpg: encrypted with RSA key, ID 0x0000000000000000
test message string
```

Sign a message:

```console
$ echo "test message string" | gpg --armor --clearsign > signed.txt
```

Verify the signature:

```console
$ gpg --verify signed.txt
gpg: Signature made Wed 25 May 2016 00:00:00 AM UTC
gpg:                using RSA key 0xBECFA3C1AE191D15
gpg: Good signature from "Dr Duh <doc@duh.to>" [ultimate]
Primary key fingerprint: 011C E16B D45B 27A5 5BA8  776D FF3E 7D88 647E BCDB
     Subkey fingerprint: 07AA 7735 E502 C5EB E09E  B8B0 BECF A3C1 AE19 1D15
```


# Rotating keys

PGP does not provide forward secrecy - a compromised key may be used to decrypt all past messages. Although keys stored on YubiKey are difficult to steal, it is not impossible - the key and PIN could be taken, or a vulnerability may be discovered in key hardware or the random number generator used to create them, for example. Therefore, it is good practice to occassionally rotate our keys.

To rotate the key, we will simply start over at the top of this guide with a new physical key.

# SSH

_Note that if you want to use a **YubiKey ONLY for SSH** (and don't really care about PGP/GPG), then [since OpenSSH v8.2](https://www.openssh.com/txt/release-8.2) you alternatively can simply `ssh-keygen -t ed25519-sk` (without requiring anything else from this guide!), as explained [e.g. in this guide](https://github.com/vorburger/vorburger.ch-Notes/blob/develop/security/ed25519-sk.md). Yubico also recently announced support for resident ssh keys under OpenSSH 8.2+ on their blue "security key 5 nfc" as mentioned in their [blog post](https://www.yubico.com/blog/github-now-supports-ssh-security-keys/)._

[gpg-agent](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/GnuPG#SSH_agent) supports the OpenSSH ssh-agent protocol (`enable-ssh-support`), as well as Putty's Pageant on Windows (`enable-putty-support`). This means it can be used instead of the traditional ssh-agent / pageant. There are some differences from ssh-agent, notably that gpg-agent does not _cache_ keys rather it converts, encrypts and stores them - persistently - as GPG keys and then makes them available to ssh clients. Any existing ssh private keys that you'd like to keep in `gpg-agent` should be deleted after they've been imported to the GPG agent.

When importing the key to `gpg-agent`, you'll be prompted for a passphrase to protect that key within GPG's key store - you may want to use the same passphrase as the original's ssh version. GPG can both cache passphrases for a determined period (ref. `gpg-agent`'s various `cache-ttl` options), and since version 2.1 can store and fetch passphrases via the macOS keychain. Note than when removing the old private key after importing to `gpg-agent`, keep the `.pub` key file around for use in specifying ssh identities (e.g. `ssh -i /path/to/identity.pub`).

Probably the biggest thing missing from `gpg-agent`'s ssh agent support is being able to remove keys. `ssh-add -d/-D` have no effect. Instead, you need to use the `gpg-connect-agent` utility to lookup a key's keygrip, match that with the desired ssh key fingerprint (as an MD5) and then delete that keygrip. The [gnupg-users mailing list](https://lists.gnupg.org/pipermail/gnupg-users/2016-August/056499.html) has more information.

## Create configuration

Create a hardened configuration for gpg-agent by downloading [drduh/config/gpg-agent.conf](https://github.com/drduh/config/blob/master/gpg-agent.conf):

```console
$ echo "# added from https://raw.githubusercontent.com/drduh/config/master/gpg-agent.conf" >> $GNUPGHOME/gpg-agent.conf
$ curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/drduh/config/master/gpg-agent.conf >> $GNUPGHOME/gpg-agent.conf
$ echo "pinentry-program /Applications/MacPorts/pinentry-mac.app/Contents/MacOS/pinentry-mac" >> $GNUPGHOME/gpg-agent.conf

$ grep -ve "^#" gpg-agent.conf
enable-ssh-support
default-cache-ttl 60
max-cache-ttl 120
pinentry-program /usr/bin/pinentry-curses
```

**Important** The `cache-ttl` options do **NOT** apply when using a YubiKey as a smartcard as the PIN is [cached by the smartcard itself](https://dev.gnupg.org/T3362). Therefore, in order to clear the PIN from cache (smartcard equivalent to `default-cache-ttl` and `max-cache-ttl`), you need to unplug the YubiKey.


## Replace agents

To launch `gpg-agent` for use by SSH, use the `gpg-connect-agent /bye` or `gpgconf --launch gpg-agent` commands.

Add these to the shell `rc` file:

```console
export GPG_TTY="$(tty)"
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK="/run/user/$UID/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh"
gpg-connect-agent updatestartuptty /bye > /dev/null
```

On modern systems, `gpgconf --list-dirs agent-ssh-socket` will automatically set `SSH_AUTH_SOCK` to the correct value and is better than hard-coding to `run/user/$UID/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh`, if available:

```console
export GPG_TTY="$(tty)"
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK=$(gpgconf --list-dirs agent-ssh-socket)
gpgconf --launch gpg-agent
```

If you use fish, the correct lines for your `config.fish` would look like this (consider putting them into the `is-interactive` block depending on your use case):
```fish
set -x GPG_TTY (tty)
set -x SSH_AUTH_SOCK (gpgconf --list-dirs agent-ssh-socket)
gpgconf --launch gpg-agent
```

Note that if you use `ForwardAgent` for ssh-agent forwarding, `SSH_AUTH_SOCK` only needs to be set on the *local* laptop (workstation), where the YubiKey is plugged in.  On the *remote* server that we SSH into, `ssh` will automatically set `SSH_AUTH_SOCK` to something like `/tmp/ssh-mXzCzYT2Np/agent.7541` when we connect.  We therefore do **NOT** manually set `SSH_AUTH_SOCK` on the server - doing so would break [SSH Agent Forwarding](#remote-machines-ssh-agent-forwarding).

If you use `S.gpg-agent.ssh` (see [SSH Agent Forwarding](#remote-machines-ssh-agent-forwarding) for more info), `SSH_AUTH_SOCK` should also be set on the *remote*. However, `GPG_TTY` should not be set on the *remote*, explanation specified in that section.

## Copy public key

**Note** It is **not** necessary to import the corresponding GPG public key in order to use SSH.

Copy and paste the output from `ssh-add` to the server's `authorized_keys` file:

```console
$ ssh-add -L
ssh-rsa AAAAB4NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAACAz[...]zreOKM+HwpkHzcy9DQcVG2Nw== cardno:000605553211
```

## (Optional) Save public key for identity file configuration

By default, SSH attempts to use all the identities available via the agent. It's often a good idea to manage exactly which keys SSH will use to connect to a server, for example to separate different roles or [to avoid being fingerprinted by untrusted ssh servers](https://blog.filippo.io/ssh-whoami-filippo-io/). To do this you'll need to use the command line argument `-i [identity_file]` or the `IdentityFile` and `IdentitiesOnly` options in `.ssh/config`.

The argument provided to `IdentityFile` is traditionally the path to the _private_ key file (for example `IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa`). For the YubiKey - indeed, in general for keys stored in an ssh agent - `IdentityFile` should point to the _public_ key file, `ssh` will select the appropriate private key from those available via the ssh agent. To prevent `ssh` from trying all keys in the agent use the `IdentitiesOnly yes` option along with one or more `-i` or `IdentityFile` options for the target host.

To reiterate, with `IdentitiesOnly yes`, `ssh` will not automatically enumerate public keys loaded into `ssh-agent` or `gpg-agent`. This means `publickey` authentication will not proceed unless explicitly named by `ssh -i [identity_file]` or in `.ssh/config` on a per-host basis.

In the case of YubiKey usage, to extract the public key from the ssh agent:

```console
$ ssh-add -L | grep "cardno:000605553211" > ~/.ssh/id_rsa_yubikey.pub
```

Then you can explicitly associate this YubiKey-stored key for used with a host, `github.com` for example, as follows:

```console
$ cat << EOF >> ~/.ssh/config
Host github.com
    IdentitiesOnly yes
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa_yubikey.pub
EOF
```

## Connect with public key authentication

```console
$ ssh git@github.com -vvv
[...]
debug2: key: cardno:000605553211 (0x1234567890),
debug1: Authentications that can continue: publickey
debug3: start over, passed a different list publickey
debug3: preferred gssapi-keyex,gssapi-with-mic,publickey,keyboard-interactive,password
debug3: authmethod_lookup publickey
debug3: remaining preferred: keyboard-interactive,password
debug3: authmethod_is_enabled publickey
debug1: Next authentication method: publickey
debug1: Offering RSA public key: cardno:000605553211
debug3: send_pubkey_test
debug2: we sent a publickey packet, wait for reply
debug1: Server accepts key: pkalg ssh-rsa blen 535
debug2: input_userauth_pk_ok: fp e5:de:a5:74:b1:3e:96:9b:85:46:e7:28:53:b4:82:c3
debug3: sign_and_send_pubkey: RSA e5:de:a5:74:b1:3e:96:9b:85:46:e7:28:53:b4:82:c3
debug1: Authentication succeeded (publickey).
[...]
```

**Tip** To make multiple connections or securely transfer many files, consider using the [ControlMaster](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/OpenSSH/Cookbook/Multiplexing) ssh option. Also see [drduh/config/ssh_config](https://github.com/drduh/config/blob/master/ssh_config).

## Import SSH keys

If there are existing SSH keys that you wish to make available via `gpg-agent`, you'll need to import them. You should then remove the original private keys. When importing the key, `gpg-agent` uses the key's filename as the key's label; this makes it easier to follow where the key originated from. In this example, we're starting with just the YubiKey's key in place and importing `~/.ssh/id_rsa`:

```console
$ ssh-add -l
4096 SHA256:... cardno:00060123456 (RSA)

$ ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_rsa && rm ~/.ssh/id_rsa
```

When invoking `ssh-add`, it will prompt for the SSH key's passphrase if present, then the `pinentry` program will prompt and confirm for a new passphrase to use to encrypt the converted key within the GPG key store.

The migrated key will be listed in `ssh-add -l`:

```console
$ ssh-add -l
4096 SHA256:... cardno:00060123456 (RSA)
2048 SHA256:... /Users/username/.ssh/id_rsa (RSA)
```

Or to show the keys with MD5 fingerprints, as used by `gpg-connect-agent`'s `KEYINFO` and `DELETE_KEY` commands:

```console
$ ssh-add -E md5 -l
4096 MD5:... cardno:00060123456 (RSA)
2048 MD5:... /Users/username/.ssh/id_rsa (RSA)
```

When using the key `pinentry` will be invoked to request the key's passphrase. The passphrase will be cached for up to 10 minutes idle time between uses, to a maximum of 2 hours.

## Remote Machines (SSH Agent Forwarding)

**Note** SSH Agent Forwarding can [add additional risk](https://matrix.org/blog/2019/05/08/post-mortem-and-remediations-for-apr-11-security-incident/#ssh-agent-forwarding-should-be-disabled) - proceed with caution!

There are two methods for ssh-agent forwarding, one is provided by OpenSSH and the other is provided by GnuPG.

The latter one may be more insecure as raw socket is just forwarded (not like `S.gpg-agent.extra` with only limited functionality; if `ForwardAgent` implemented by OpenSSH is just forwarding the raw socket, then they are insecure to the same degree). But for the latter one, one convenience is that one may forward once and use this agent everywhere in the remote. So again, proceed with caution!

For example, `tmux` does not have some environment variables like `$SSH_AUTH_SOCK` when you ssh into remote and attach an old `tmux` session. In this case if you use `ForwardAgent`, you need to find the socket manually and `export SSH_AUTH_SOCK=/tmp/ssh-agent-xxx/xxxx.socket` for each shell. But with `S.gpg-agent.ssh` in fixed place, one can just use it as ssh-agent in their shell rc file.

### Use ssh-agent 

In the above steps, you have successfully configured a local ssh-agent.

You should now be able use `ssh -A remote` on the _local_ machine to log into _remote_, and should then be able to use YubiKey as if it were connected to the remote machine. For example, using e.g. `ssh-add -l` on that remote machine should show the public key from the YubiKey (note `cardno:`).  (If you don't want to have to remember to use `ssh -A`, you can use `ForwardAgent yes` in `~/.ssh/config`.  As a security best practice, always use `ForwardAgent yes` only for a single `Hostname`, never for all servers.)

### Use S.gpg-agent.ssh

First you need to go through [Remote Machines (GPG Agent Forwarding)](#remote-machines-gpg-agent-forwarding), know the conditions for gpg-agent forwarding and know the location of `S.gpg-agent.ssh` on both the local and the remote.

You may use the command:

```console
$ gpgconf --list-dirs agent-ssh-socket
```

Then in your `.ssh/config` add one sentence for that remote

```
Host
  Hostname remote-host.tld
  StreamLocalBindUnlink yes
  RemoteForward /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh
  # RemoteForward [remote socket] [local socket]
  # Note that ForwardAgent is not wanted here!
```

After successfully ssh into the remote, you should check that you have `/run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh` lying there.

Then in the *remote* you can type in command line or configure in the shell rc file with:

```console
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK="/run/user/$UID/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh"
```

After typing or sourcing your shell rc file, with `ssh-add -l` you should find your ssh public key now.

**Note** In this process no gpg-agent in the remote is involved, hence `gpg-agent.conf` in the remote is of no use. Also pinentry is invoked locally.

### Chained SSH Agent Forwarding

If you use `ssh-agent` provided by OpenSSH and want to forward it into a *third* box, you can just `ssh -A third` on the *remote*.

Meanwhile, if you use `S.gpg-agent.ssh`, assume you have gone through the steps above and have `S.gpg-agent.ssh` on the *remote*, and you would like to forward this agent into a *third* box, first you may need to configure `sshd_config` and `SSH_AUTH_SOCK` of *third* in the same way as *remote*, then in the ssh config of *remote*, add the following lines

```console
Host third
  Hostname third-host.tld
  StreamLocalBindUnlink yes
  RemoteForward /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh
  # RemoteForward [remote socket] [local socket]
  # Note that ForwardAgent is not wanted here!
```

You should change the path according to `gpgconf --list-dirs agent-ssh-socket` on *remote* and *third*.

## GitHub

You can use YubiKey to sign GitHub commits and tags. It can also be used for GitHub SSH authentication, allowing you to push, pull, and commit without a password.

Login to GitHub and upload SSH and PGP public keys in Settings.

To configure a signing key:

	> git config --global user.signingkey $KEYID

Make sure the user.email option matches the email address associated with the PGP identity.

Now, to sign commits or tags simply use the `-S` option. GPG will automatically query YubiKey and prompt you for a PIN.

To authenticate:

## macOS

To use gui applications on macOS, [a little bit more setup is needed](https://jms1.net/yubikey/make-ssh-use-gpg-agent.md).

Create `$HOME/Library/LaunchAgents/gnupg.gpg-agent.plist` with the following contents:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN"
  "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
<plist version="1.0">
    <dict>
        <key>Label</key>
        <string>gnupg.gpg-agent</string>
        <key>RunAtLoad</key>
        <true/>
        <key>KeepAlive</key>
        <false/>
        <key>ProgramArguments</key>
        <array>
            <string>/usr/local/MacGPG2/bin/gpg-connect-agent</string>
            <string>/bye</string>
        </array>
    </dict>
</plist>
```

```console
launchctl load gnupg.gpg-agent.plist
```

Create `$HOME/Library/LaunchAgents/gnupg.gpg-agent-symlink.plist` with the following contens:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/ProperyList-1.0/dtd">
<plist version="1.0">
    <dict>
        <key>Label</key>
        <string>gnupg.gpg-agent-symlink</string>
        <key>ProgramArguments</key>
        <array>
            <string>/bin/sh</string>
            <string>-c</string>
            <string>/bin/ln -sf $HOME/.gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh $SSH_AUTH_SOCK</string>
        </array>
        <key>RunAtLoad</key>
        <true/>
    </dict>
</plist>
```

```console
launchctl load gnupg.gpg-agent-symlink.plist
```

You will need to either reboot, or log out and log back in, in order to activate these changes.

# Remote Machines (GPG Agent Forwarding)

This section is different from ssh-agent forwarding in [SSH](#ssh) as gpg-agent forwarding has a broader usage, not only limited to ssh.

To use YubiKey to sign a git commit on a remote host, or signing email/decrypt files on a remote host, configure and use GPG Agent Forwarding. To ssh through another network, especially to push to/pull from GitHub using ssh, see [Remote Machines (SSH Agent forwarding)](#remote-machines-ssh-agent-forwarding) for more info.

To do this, you need access to the remote machine and the YubiKey has to be set up on the host machine.

After gpg-agent forwarding, it is nearly the same as if YubiKey was inserted in the remote. Hence configurations except `gpg-agent.conf` for the remote can be the same as those for the local.

**Important** `gpg-agent.conf` for the remote is of no use, hence `$GPG_TTY` is of no use too for the remote. The mechanism is that after forwarding, remote `gpg` directly communicates with `S.gpg-agent` without *starting* `gpg-agent` on the remote.

On the remote machine, edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` to set `StreamLocalBindUnlink yes`

**Optional** If you do not have root access to the remote machine to edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`, you will need to remove the socket (located at `gpgconf --list-dir agent-socket`) on the remote machine before forwarding works. For example, `rm /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent`. Further information can be found on the [AgentForwarding GNUPG wiki page](https://wiki.gnupg.org/AgentForwarding).

Import public keys to the remote machine. This can be done by fetching from a keyserver. On the local machine, copy the public keyring to the remote machine:

```console
$ scp ~/.gnupg/pubring.kbx remote:~/.gnupg/
```

On modern distributions, such as Fedora 30, there is typically no need to also set `RemoteForward` in `~/.ssh/config` as detailed in the next chapter, because the right thing happens automatically.

If any error happens (or there is no `gpg-agent.socket` in the remote) for modern distributions, you may go through the configuration steps in the next section.

## Steps for older distributions

On the local machine, run:

```console
$ gpgconf --list-dirs agent-extra-socket
```

This should return a path to agent-extra-socket - `/run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.extra` - though on older Linux distros (and macOS) it may be `/home/<user>/.gnupg/S/gpg-agent.extra`

Find the agent socket on the **remote** machine:

```console
$ gpgconf --list-dirs agent-socket
```

This should return a path such as `/run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent`

Finally, enable agent forwarding for a given machine by adding the following to the local machine's ssh config file `~/.ssh/config` (your agent sockets may be different):

```
Host
  Hostname remote-host.tld
  StreamLocalBindUnlink yes
  RemoteForward /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.extra
  # RemoteForward [remote socket] [local socket]
```

If you're still having problems, it may be necessary to edit `gpg-agent.conf` file on the *local* machines to add the following information:

```
pinentry-program /usr/bin/pinentry-gtk-2
extra-socket /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.extra
```

**Note** The pinentry program starts on *local* machine, not remote. Hence when there are needs to enter the pin you need to find the prompt on the local machine.

**Important** Any pinentry program except `pinentry-tty` or `pinentry-curses` may be used. This is because local `gpg-agent` may start headlessly (By systemd without `$GPG_TTY` set locally telling which tty it is on), thus failed to obtain the pin. Errors on the remote may be misleading saying that there is *IO Error*. (Yes, internally there is actually an *IO Error* since it happens when writing to/reading from tty while finding no tty to use, but for end users this is not friendly.)

See [Issue #85](https://github.com/drduh/YubiKey-Guide/issues/85) for more information and troubleshooting.

## Chained GPG Agent Forwarding

Assume you have gone through the steps above and have `S.gpg-agent` on the *remote*, and you would like to forward this agent into a *third* box, first you may need to configure `sshd_config` of *third* in the same way as *remote*, then in the ssh config of *remote*, add the following lines:

```console
Host third
  Hostname third-host.tld
  StreamLocalBindUnlink yes
  RemoteForward /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent /run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent
  # RemoteForward [remote socket] [local socket]
```

You should change the path according to `gpgconf --list-dirs agent-socket` on *remote* and *third*.

**Note** On *local* you have `S.gpg-agent.extra` whereas on *remote* and *third*, you only have `S.gpg-agent`.

# Using Multiple Keys

To use a single identity with multiple YubiKeys - or to replace a lost card with another - issue this command to switch keys:

```console
$ gpg-connect-agent "scd serialno" "learn --force" /bye
```

Alternatively, use a script to delete the GnuPG shadowed key, where the card serial number is stored (see [GnuPG #T2291](https://dev.gnupg.org/T2291)):

```console
$ cat >> ~/scripts/remove-keygrips.sh <<EOF
#!/usr/bin/env bash
test ! "$@" && echo "Specify a key." && exit 1
KEYGRIPS="$(gpg --with-keygrip --list-secret-keys $@ | grep Keygrip | awk '{print $3}')"
for keygrip in $KEYGRIPS
do
    rm "$HOME/.gnupg/private-keys-v1.d/$keygrip.key" 2> /dev/null
done

gpg --card-status
EOF

$ chmod +x ~/scripts/remove-keygrips.sh

$ ~/scripts/remove-keygrips.sh $KEYID
```

See discussion in Issues [#19](https://github.com/drduh/YubiKey-Guide/issues/19) and [#112](https://github.com/drduh/YubiKey-Guide/issues/112) for more information and troubleshooting steps.

# Require touch

**Note** This is not possible on YubiKey NEO.

By default, YubiKey will perform encryption, signing and authentication operations without requiring any action from the user, after the key is plugged in and first unlocked with the PIN.

To require a touch for each key operation, install [YubiKey Manager](https://developers.yubico.com/yubikey-manager/) and recall the Admin PIN:

**Note** Older versions of YubiKey Manager use `touch` instead of `set-touch` in the following commands.

Authentication:

```console
$ ykman openpgp keys set-touch aut on
```

Signing:

```console
$ ykman openpgp keys set-touch sig on
```

Encryption:

```console
$ ykman openpgp keys set-touch enc on
```

Depending on how the YubiKey is going to be used, you may want to look at the policy options for each of these and adjust the above commands accordingly. They can be viewed with the following command:

```
$ ykman openpgp keys set-touch -h
Usage: ykman openpgp keys set-touch [OPTIONS] KEY POLICY

  Set touch policy for OpenPGP keys.

  KEY     Key slot to set (sig, enc, aut or att).
  POLICY  Touch policy to set (on, off, fixed, cached or cached-fixed).

  The touch policy is used to require user interaction for all operations using the private key on the YubiKey. The touch policy is set individually for each key slot. To see the current touch policy, run

      $ ykman openpgp info

  Touch policies:

  Off (default)   No touch required
  On              Touch required
  Fixed           Touch required, can't be disabled without a full reset
  Cached          Touch required, cached for 15s after use
  Cached-Fixed    Touch required, cached for 15s after use, can't be disabled
                  without a full reset

Options:
  -a, --admin-pin TEXT  Admin PIN for OpenPGP.
  -f, --force           Confirm the action without prompting.
  -h, --help            Show this message and exit.
```

If the YubiKey is going to be used within an email client that opens and verifies encrypted mail, `Cached` or `Cached-Fixed` may be desirable.

YubiKey will blink when it is waiting for a touch. On Linux you can also use [yubikey-touch-detector](https://github.com/maximbaz/yubikey-touch-detector) to have an indicator or notification that YubiKey is waiting for a touch.

# Reset

If PIN attempts are exceeded, the card is locked and must be [reset](https://developers.yubico.com/ykneo-openpgp/ResetApplet.html) and set up again using the encrypted backup.

Copy the following script to a file and run `gpg-connect-agent -r $file` to lock and terminate the card. Then re-insert YubiKey to reset.

```console
/hex
scd serialno
scd apdu 00 20 00 81 08 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
scd apdu 00 20 00 81 08 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
scd apdu 00 20 00 81 08 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
scd apdu 00 20 00 81 08 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
scd apdu 00 20 00 83 08 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
scd apdu 00 20 00 83 08 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
scd apdu 00 20 00 83 08 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
scd apdu 00 20 00 83 08 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
scd apdu 00 e6 00 00
scd apdu 00 44 00 00
/echo Card has been successfully reset.
```

Or use `ykman` (sometimes in `~/.local/bin/`):

```console
$ ykman openpgp reset
WARNING! This will delete all stored OpenPGP keys and data and restore factory settings? [y/N]: y
Resetting OpenPGP data, don't remove your YubiKey...
Success! All data has been cleared and default PINs are set.
PIN:         123456
Reset code:  NOT SET
Admin PIN:   12345678
```

# Recovery after reset

There is no recovery. Start over from the top.

# Notes

1. YubiKey has two configurations: one invoked with a short press, and the other with a long press. By default, the short-press mode is configured for HID OTP - a brief touch will emit an OTP string starting with `cccccccc`. If you rarely use the OTP mode, you can swap it to the second configuration via the YubiKey Personalization tool. If you *never* use OTP, you can disable it entirely using the [YubiKey Manager](https://developers.yubico.com/yubikey-manager) application (note, this not the similarly named older YubiKey NEO Manager).
1. Programming YubiKey for GPG keys still lets you use its other configurations - [U2F](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_2nd_Factor), [OTP](https://www.yubico.com/faq/what-is-a-one-time-password-otp/) and [static password](https://www.yubico.com/products/services-software/personalization-tools/static-password/) modes, for example.
1. Setting an expiry essentially forces you to manage your subkeys and announces to the rest of the world that you are doing so. Setting an expiry on a primary key is ineffective for protecting the key from loss - whoever has the primary key can simply extend its expiry period. Revocation certificates are [better suited](https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/14718/does-openpgp-key-expiration-add-to-security/79386#79386) for this purpose. It may be appropriate for your use case to set expiry dates on subkeys.
1. To switch between two or more identities on different keys - unplug the first key and restart gpg-agent, ssh-agent and pinentry with `pkill gpg-agent ; pkill ssh-agent ; pkill pinentry ; eval $(gpg-agent --daemon --enable-ssh-support)`, then plug in the other key and run `gpg-connect-agent updatestartuptty /bye` - then it should be ready for use.
1. To use yubikeys on more than one computer with gpg: After the initial setup, import the public keys on the second workstation. Confirm gpg can see the card via `gpg --card-status`, Trust the public keys you imported ultimately (as above). At this point `gpg --list-secret-keys` should show your (trusted) key.

# Troubleshooting

- Use `man gpg` to understand GPG options and command-line flags.

- To get more information on potential errors, restart the `gpg-agent` process with debug output to the console with `pkill gpg-agent; gpg-agent --daemon --no-detach -v -v --debug-level advanced --homedir ~/.gnupg`.

- If you encounter problems connecting to YubiKey with GPG - try unplugging and re-inserting YubiKey, and restarting the `gpg-agent` process.

- If you receive the error, `gpg: decryption failed: secret key not available` - you likely need to install GnuPG version 2.x. Another possibility is that there is a problem with the PIN, e.g. it is too short or blocked.

- If you receive the error, `Yubikey core error: no yubikey present` - make sure the YubiKey is inserted correctly. It should blink once when plugged in.

- If you still receive the error, `Yubikey core error: no yubikey present` - you likely need to install newer versions of yubikey-personalize as outlined in [Required software](#required-software).

- If you receive the error, `Yubikey core error: write error` - YubiKey is likely locked. Install and run yubikey-personalization-gui to unlock it.

- If you receive the error, `Key does not match the card's capability` - you likely need to use 2048 bit RSA key sizes.

- If you receive the error, `sign_and_send_pubkey: signing failed: agent refused operation` - make sure you replaced `ssh-agent` with `gpg-agent` as noted above.

- If you still receive the error, `sign_and_send_pubkey: signing failed: agent refused operation` - [run the command](https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=835394) `gpg-connect-agent updatestartuptty /bye`

- If you still receive the error, `sign_and_send_pubkey: signing failed: agent refused operation` - edit `~/.gnupg/gpg-agent.conf` to set a valid `pinentry` program path, e.g. `pinentry-program /usr/local/bin/pinentry-mac` on macOS.

- If you receive the error, `The agent has no identities` from `ssh-add -L`, make sure you have installed and started `scdaemon`.

- If you receive the error, `Error connecting to agent: No such file or directory` from `ssh-add -L`, the UNIX file socket that the agent uses for communication with other processes may not be set up correctly. On Debian, try `export SSH_AUTH_SOCK="/run/user/$UID/gnupg/S.gpg-agent.ssh"`. Also see that `gpgconf --list-dirs agent-ssh-socket` is returning single path, to existing `S.gpg-agent.ssh` socket.

- If you receive the error, `Permission denied (publickey)`, increase ssh verbosity with the `-v` flag and ensure the public key from the card is being offered: `Offering public key: RSA SHA256:abcdefg... cardno:00060123456`. If it is, ensure you are connecting as the right user on the target system, rather than as the user on the local system. Otherwise, be sure `IdentitiesOnly` is not [enabled](https://github.com/FiloSottile/whosthere#how-do-i-stop-it) for this host.

- If SSH authentication still fails - add up to 3 `-v` flags to the `ssh` client to increase verbosity.

- If it still fails, it may be useful to stop the background `sshd` daemon process service on the server (e.g. using `sudo systemctl stop sshd`) and instead start it in the foreground with extensive debugging output, using `/usr/sbin/sshd -eddd`. Note that the server will not fork and will only process one connection, therefore has to be re-started after every `ssh` test.

- If you receive the error, `Please insert the card with serial number: *` see [using of multiple keys](#using-multiple-keys).

- If you receive the error, `There is no assurance this key belongs to the named user` or `encryption failed: Unusable public key` use `gpg --edit-key` to set `trust` to `5 = I trust ultimately`.
  - If, when you try the above `--edit-key` command, you get the error 
    `Need the secret key to do this.`, you can manually specify trust for the key in
    `~/.gnupg/gpg.conf` by using the `trust-key [your key ID]` directive.

- If, when using a previously provisioned YubiKey on a new computer with `pass`, you see the
  following error on `pass insert`:
    ```
    gpg: 0x0000000000000000: There is no assurance this key belongs to the named user
    gpg: [stdin]: encryption failed: Unusable public key
    ```
    you need to adjust the trust associated with the key. See the above bullet.

- If you receive the error, `gpg: 0x0000000000000000: skipped: Unusable public key` or `encryption failed: Unusable public key` the sub-key may be expired and can no longer be used to encrypt nor sign messages. It can still be used to decrypt and authenticate, however.

- Refer to Yubico article [Troubleshooting Issues with GPG](https://support.yubico.com/hc/en-us/articles/360013714479-Troubleshooting-Issues-with-GPG) for additional guidance.
